=pod

=head1 NAME

Moose::Manual::Support - Policies regarding support, releases, and
compatibility.

=head1 SUPPORT POLICY

There are two principles to Moose's policy of supported behavior.

=over 4

=item 1.

Moose favors correctness over everything.

=item 2.

Moose supports documented and tested behavior, not accidental behavior or side
effects.

=back

If a behavior has never been documented or tested, the behavior is
I<officially> undefined. Relying upon undocumented and untested behavior is
done at your own risk.

If a behavior is documented or tested but found to be incorrect later, the
behavior will go through a deprecation period. During the deprecation period,
use of that feature will cause a warning. Eventually, the deprecated feature
will be removed.

=head1 RELEASE SCHEDULE

Moose is on a system of weekly minor releases and quarterly major releases. A
minor release is defined as one that makes every attempt to preserve backwards
compatibility. Currently this means that we did not introduce any new
dependency conflicts, and that we did not make any changes to documented,
tested behavior. A minor release can include new features and bug fixes.

Major releases may be backwards incompatible. Moose prioritizes
correctness over backwards compatibility or performance; see the L<Deprecation
Policy> to understand how backwards incompatible changes are announced.

Before a major release, a series of development releases will be made so that
users can test the upcoming major release before it is distributed to CPAN. It
is in the best interests of everyone involved if these releases are tested as
widely as possible.

=head1 DEPRECATION POLICY

Moose has always prioritized correctness over performance and backwards
compatibility.

Major deprecations or API changes are documented in the Changes file as well
as in L<Moose::Manual::Delta>. The Moose developers will also make an effort
to warn users of upcoming deprecations and breakage through the Moose blog
(http://blog.moose.perl.org).

Deprecated APIs will be preserved for at least one year I<after the major
release which deprecates that API>. Deprecated APIs will only be removed in a
major release.

Moose will also warn during installation if the version of Moose being
installed will break an installed dependency. Unfortunately, due to the nature
of the Perl install process these warnings may be easy to miss.

=head1 BACKWARDS COMPATIBILITY

We try to ensure compatibility by having a extensive test suite (last
count just over around 5123 tests), as well as testing a number of
packages (currently just under 100 packages) that depend on Moose before
any release.

The current list of downstream dependencies that are tested is in
C<xt/author/test-my-dependents.t>.

=head1 VERSION NUMBERS

Moose version numbers consist of three parts, in the form X.YYZZ. The X is the
"special magic number" that only gets changed for really big changes. Think of
this as being like the "5" in Perl 5.12.1.

The YY portion is the major version number. Moose uses even numbers for stable
releases, and odd numbers for trial releases. The ZZ is the minor version, and
it simply increases monotonically. It starts at "00" each time a new major
version is released.

Semantically, this means that any two releases which share a major version
should be API-compatible with each other. In other words, 2.0200, 2.0201, and
2.0274 are all API-compatible.

Prior to version 2.0, Moose version numbers were monotonically incrementing
two decimal values (0.01, 0.02, ... 1.11, 1.12, etc.).

Moose was declared production ready at version 0.18 (via L<<
http://www.perlmonks.org/?node_id=608144 >>).

=head1 CONTRIBUTING

Moose has an open contribution policy. Anybody is welcome to submit a
patch. Please see L<Moose::Manual::Contributing> for more details.

=cut
